Button updated variations (#1287)
ni/nimble: packages/nimble-components/src/button/specs/README.md

# Nimble-Button New Visual Designs Implementation

## Problem Statement

The Visual Design spec for Nimble buttons now includes primary button states `primary-mono` and `primary` that aren't implemented in the nimble-button component yet.

## Links To Relevant Work Items and Reference Material

[Nimble Issue #663: Adopt nimble-button visual designs for states primary, quiet, and loud](https://github.com/ni/nimble/issues/663)

[Figma Spec](https://www.figma.com/file/PO9mFOu5BCl8aJvFchEeuN/Nimble_Components?type=design&node-id=1295-77205)

## Implementation / Design

[FAST Button API](https://github.com/microsoft/fast/blob/de7f234ef871204fcac2b5df59433d919809341d/packages/web-components/fast-foundation/src/button/README.md)

> The appearance of the button will have states `default` (White), `primary-mono` (Black), and `primary` (Green), each with its own color scheme based on the UI theme.

Reviewer: I think trying to call out what color these states are is a bit confusing since it depends on what theme you are in. For example, `default` isn't "White" in most (or maybe any) cases and `primary-mono` isn't black in the Color theme.

This statement could also be clarified because there is something called `appearance` on a button, but you're really talking about `appearance-variant` here.

Perhaps something more like:
```suggestion
There are three possible values for `appearance-variant` on a button: `default`, `primary-mono`, and `primary`. Each variant will have its own color based on the UI theme.
```

> The appearance of the button will have states `default` (White), `primary-mono` (Black), and `primary` (Green), each with its own color scheme based on the UI theme.

Reviewer: We try to avoid shorthands for property names -- [see docs here](https://github.com/ni/nimble/blob/main/packages/nimble-components/CONTRIBUTING.md#attribute-common-value-patterns). Assuming we're fine with the direction of `primary-mono` and `primary`, I think they really should be `primary-monochromatic` and `primary`.

It does make the value pretty long, but at least off the top of my head, I can't think of a better name suggestion.

Reviewer 2: For reference, in the Figma spec the variants are called "p1" (monochromatic) and "p2" (colored). 

Assuming we agree that the color version should be the "first choice" primary state, I agree it makes sense to call it `primary` so that prominence is more obvious and so that existing clients migrate to it automatically. If that's the case, then some other name ideas for the grey one are:
- `primary-monochrome`
- `primary-neutral`
- `primary-quiet`
- `primary-2`

Whatever we pick, we should ask Brandon to reflect that decision in Figma.

Reviewer 3: > Assuming we agree that the color version should be the "first choice" primary state, I agree it makes sense to call it primary so that prominence is more obvious and so that existing clients migrate to it automatically.

One question I have is should we expect only one style of primary button to be used on a page at a time / even a whole app at a time? Or should there be one primary color button on a page and maybe multiple primary monochrome buttons? i.e. individual sections could have monochrome buttons but a page should have a at most a single color button?

It seems weird to me that we would mix different styles of primary buttons across different button groups on a page or even a whole app.

Some other ideas (P1 vs P2):
- primary vs brand
- primary vs primary-brand
- primary-flat vs primary
- primary-subtle vs primary
- secondary vs primary (if pages should have have like multiple button groups with secondary buttons but like a single primary button on a page)

Reviewer 3: And to complete the thought, if there should only be one style on a page at a time maybe it should be a theme provider configuration token instead so apps can't accidentally mix styles on a page (as easily)

Author: > > Assuming we agree that the color version should be the "first choice" primary state, I agree it makes sense to call it primary so that prominence is more obvious and so that existing clients migrate to it automatically.
> 
> One question I have is should we expect only one style of primary button to be used on a page at a time / even a whole app at a time? Or should there be one primary color button on a page and maybe multiple primary monochrome buttons? i.e. individual sections could have monochrome buttons but a page should have a at most a single color button?
> 
> It seems weird to me that we would mix different styles of primary buttons across different button groups on a page or even a whole app.

I'm a bit confused about this as well, I'll talk to Brandon about this today.

`primary-mono` and `primary` states of buttons are primary buttons, so there should only be one of either in a section.

The `primary-mono` button can be used when there is a conflict with color and its context.
The `primary` button can be used in situations where a button needs to have the most prominent eye-catching approach, or when there is a lack of color.

Ghost buttons will not have `primary-mono` or `primary` states.

> Outline and Block buttons in the Color UI will not have a `primary` state, as this has been declared as not recommended for this type of background.

Reviewer: Currently ghost setting an `appearance-variant` on ghost buttons has no effect. I assume that will stay the same?

What about the two primary states in the Color theme? Would one apply a primary style and one would keep the component as though `appearance-variant` isn't set? Or, would both `appearance-variant` values just be rendered identically?

Author: Yes, the ghost setting will stay the same, although we could give its radio a functionality I'll mention in the final paragraph.

If I understand correctly, I think that if the user was to, for example, click `primary` on the radio button for the color theme, the button should have the default style, as though `appearance-variant` isn't set. If we instead have the values rendered identically it may be confusing.

Although, I feel that giving the option to select the value `primary` when it doesn't do anything could be confusing on its own. Would it be possible to have the radio button for `primary` disabled when the color theme is being used? Similarly, could the radio buttons `primary` and `primary-monochrome` be disabled when the ghost button is selected on any theme?

Reviewer: Actually, I see that you already have outlined a proposal for this behavior in the spec.

I don't have an issue with the current proposal of styling a `primary-accent` button in the Color theme as though `appearance-variant` wasn't set on it at all.

> The current appearance-variant attribute will be used to hold these new states, as its previous implementation purpose is no longer used.

Reviewer 2: For clients who are currently using the `primary` appearance variant, the proposal is that they'll automatically migrate to the new `primary` variant. Could you double check that Brandon is comfortable with us forcing that transition on all apps? (He usually comes to our team meeting on Thursdays so we can ask him then or you can reach out offline). I doubt it'll be a problem since it's just a slight change in the shade of green, but want to be sure.

Author: Sounds good. I'll reach out to him offline to ask a few smaller questions and give him a head start on larger ones, and we can continue the discussion with everyone at today's team meeting.

-   Does the design follow an existing design in this codebase or FAST?
    -   Yes, this follows exisiting button design- only the button colors are changed.
-   Does the design align with web standards like web components, ARIA, etc?
    -   Yes
-   Does the design create new requirements on clients or break any APIs?
    -   Possible breaking change in styling, as the previous style of the `primary` state used in appearance-variant will be replaced with the new styling
-   How does the design affect testing, documentation, performance, security, etc?
    -   New Chromatic testing for updated styles / states.

## Alternative Implementations / Designs

Can the new button states be placed in the appearance-variant attribute, or should a new attribute be created for this?

## Open Issues

> Currently, only the nimble-button and nimble-anchor-button have the appearance-variant attribute. Should the `primary-mono` and `primary` states only be implemented for these buttons, while other buttons such as the nimble-menu-button, nimble-toggle-button, and nimble-card-button (which do not have the appearance-variant attribute) would be left alone?

Reviewer 2: Let's see if we can get Brandon's opinion on these questions too. But I think the team consensus is that we shouldn't implement these appearance variants on those button types.

> Molly mentioned that there was a design with a green (Primary) menu button, so should this button type (nimble-menu-button) alone be included and also recieve the appearance-variant attribute?

Reviewer: A minor correction here -- it's a primary _toggle_ button that I think I've seen in some visual designs. But, I think we should consider figuring out how to implement that out-of-scope for this work. In general, I agree with our current implementation where menu buttons, toggle buttons, and card buttons do not have a concept of an `appearance-variant`.
